KEP-4650: StatefulSet Support for Updating Volume Claim Template (#4651)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-apps/4650-stateful-set-update-claim-template/README.md

Currently, PVC `spec.resources.requests.storage` and `spec.volumeAttributesClassName`
fields can be updated in-place.
For other fields, we support updating existing PersistentVolumeClaim objects with `OnDelete` strategy.
All the updates to PersistentVolumeClaim can be coordinated with `Pod` updates
to honor any dependencies between them.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Currently there are very few things that users can do to update the volumes of
their existing StatefulSet deployments.
They can only expand the volumes, or modify them with VolumeAttributesClass
by updating individual PersistentVolumeClaim objects as an ad-hoc operation.
When the StatefulSet scales up, the new PVC(s) will be created with the old
config and this again needs manual intervention.

> Modifying immutable parameters, shinking, or even switch to another

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modifying immutable parameters, shrinking, or even switchin to another
```

> storage provider is not possible currently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
storage provider is not currently possible.
```

This brings many headaches in a continuously evolving environment.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
* Allow users to update the `volumeClaimTemplates` of a `StatefulSet` in place.

> * Automatically update the associated PersistentVolumeClaim objects in-place if applicable.

Reviewer: What do you mean by `in-place` here?

Reviewer 2: For example, the resizedisk feature can automatically adjust the disk and filesystem sizes while the pod is running. In addition to this there will be new features like VolumeAttributesClass that will also support in-place changes to the storage being used.

Author: I use the word in-place to explicitly distinguish from Delete/Create style update for Pods. We should never delete PVC automatically.

* Support updating PersistentVolumeClaim objects with `OnDelete` strategy.
* Coordinate updates to `Pod` and PersistentVolumeClaim objects.
* Provide accurate status and error messages to users when the update fails.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->
* Support automatic re-creating of PersistentVolumeClaim. We will never delete a PVC automatically.
* Validate the updated `volumeClaimTemplates` as how PVC patch does.
* Update ephemeral volumes.
* Patch PVCs that are different from the template, e.g. StatefulSet adopts the pre-existing PVCs.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
1. Change API server to allow specific updates to `volumeClaimTemplates` of a StatefulSet:
   * `labels`
   * `annotations`
   * `resources.requests.storage`

>    * `volumeAttributesClassName`

Reviewer: When listing the fields please us full StatefulSet path, so there's no confusion about which fields we're talking about. See one of my earlier comments.

> 2. Modify StatefulSet controller to add PVC reconciliation logic.

Reviewer: Can you roughly list what kind of changes you're expecting here?

Author: Added in implementation details

> 3. Collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.

Reviewer: I'd wrap this under no. 2 above, since that's part of the controller changes, and its responsibility to surface PVC state to the StatefulSet user.

### Kubernetes API Changes

Changes to StatefulSet `spec`:

Introduce a new field in StatefulSet `spec`: `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` to
specify how to coordinate the update of PVCs and Pods. Possible values are:

> - `OnDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.

Reviewer 3: Could have some value in calling this `OnPVCDelete` to clarify it is only updated if PVC is deleted, especially if there could be other deletion-based alternatives like `OnPodDelete` in the future.

- `InPlace`: patch the PVC in-place if possible. Also includes the `OnDelete` behavior.

Changes to StatefultSet `status`:

Additionally collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.

For each PVC in the template:
- compatible: the number of PVCs that are compatible with the template.
  These replicas will not be blocked on Pod recreation.
- updating: the number of PVCs that are being updated in-place (e.g. expansion in progress).
- overSized: the number of PVCs that are larger than the template.
- totalCapacity: the sum of `status.capacity` of all the PVCs.

Some fields in the `status` are also updated to reflect the staus of the PVCs:
- readyReplicas: in addition to pods, also consider the PVCs status. A PVC is not ready if:
  - `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `InPlace` and the PVC is updating;
- availableReplicas: total number of replicas of which both Pod and PVCs are ready for at least `minReadySeconds`
- currentRevision, updateRevision, currentReplicas, updatedReplicas

>   are updated to reflect the status of PVCs.

Reviewer: Can you describe in more detail how are you planning to implement that? Currently statefulset controller is ONLY watching pod and statefulset changes, it doesn't follow created PVCs. Is your proposal expanding the controller to register event handlers for all created PVCs or are you planning to update the statefulset status only when processing the statefulset itself.

Author: Make sense. I will not change the meaning of `readyReplicas` and `availableReplicas`.

But for currentRevision, updateRevision, currentReplicas, updatedReplicas, they are related to hash of ControllerRevision. Since I've added claim templates to ControllerRevision, I should also update these 4 fields.

I will add `claimsReadyReplicas` instead.

Reviewer 4: +1 to @soltysh 

As for changing `currentRevision` etc. - conceptually changing their semantics sounds ok, but I don't fully understand how that works.
You mentioned "since I've added claim templates to ControllerRevision" - how is that added? What it means for our upgrade story if we have a ControllerRevision that doesn't contain the PVC template?
@soltysh - I would like to hear your thoughts too about that aspect

Reviewer: We could consider expanding the controllerrevision not with a whole volumeClaimTemplate but only the modifiable fields which are listed in this document. This way we'll ensure the size constraints are not stretched too thing.

Author: > We could consider expanding the controllerrevision not with a whole volumeClaimTemplate but only the modifiable fields which are listed in this document. This way we'll ensure the size constraints are not stretched too thing.

@soltysh This may not be practical. Because currently the content of ControllerRevision is defined as a strategic merge patch. And the list type of volumeClaimTemplates is [atomic](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3e39d1074fc717a883aaf57b966dd7a06dfca2ec/staging/src/k8s.io/api/apps/v1/types.go#L215).  Which means the list is replaced as a whole when merging.

> Do we need to include the PVC in the revision?

@atiratree  I need to add PVC into revision, so that I will get a new revision when claim templates are updated and trigger the rollout. 

> Also if you cannot roll back, what is the purpose of the revisions?

Besides the above reason, we can still undo other fields of claim templates, and we may also support undo size change in the future.

> Would it make sense to have different kinds of undo and add support for them in kubectl?

Interesting. How about add `kubectl rollout undo sts ... --exclude spec.volumeClaimTemplates`?

Reviewer 5: Ok makes sense tracking the `volumeClaimTemplate` in the revision. Anyway, it seems we have at least two scenarios for the `kubectl rollout undo` and possibly a breaking change. Can we please mention that in the KEP and how it will affect the StatefulSet workloads?

Now, when I think about it, there could be multiple clients that implement the rollback. Maybe we should guide that via the API. E.g. having some kind of `rollback` or `rollbackPolicy` as part of the `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy`?
```
- BestEffort # BestEffort can result in a partial rollback, for example when it is not possible to decrease the size of the PVC. This might result in an additional revision being created
- Strict # Full rollback is performed if possible. This policy will fail fast the rollback if some part of the rollback cannot be performed.
```

If we start adding volumeClaimUpdatePolicy we could make the `rollback` field required so the users are well aware what behavior they subscrbe to.

The clients and API can can then use this field to implement the behavior.

Author: > Can we please mention that in the KEP and how it will affect the StatefulSet workloads?

Already mentioned here:
> Since we don't allow decreasing the storage size of `volumeClaimTemplates`,
it is not possible to run `kubectl rollout undo` after increasing it.

And my desire is lift the storage size limit in the future, and make `kubectl rollout undo` always work.

> E.g. having some kind of rollback or rollbackPolicy as part of the volumeClaimUpdatePolicy?

Looks strange to me. I think there is no Kubernetes API for undo now. Do we ever have field that only serve as suggestion to client before? If we add this, we risk each client implement this differently, causing further confusion.

Since it only affects client behavior, why not a client-side flag? e.g. `kubectl rollout undo --best-effort`. Other client may implement their own flag.

With these changes, user can still use `kubectl rollout status` to monitor the update process,
both for automated patching and for the PVCs that need manual intervention.

### Updated Reconciliation Logic

How to update PVCs:
1. If `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `InPlace`,
   and if `volumeClaimTemplates` and actual PVC only differ in mutable fields
   (`spec.resources.requests.storage`, `spec.volumeAttributesClassName`, `metadata.labels`, and `metadata.annotations` currently),
   patch the PVC to the extent possible.

>    - `spec.resources.requests.storage` is patched to max(template spec, PVC status)

Reviewer 6: Hi,
I appreciate your work.
It says `max(template spec, PVC status)` here, but isn't it `max(template spec, PVC spec)`? If we use `PVC status`, it might interrupt the user's PVC expansion as follows.

1. Initial state: PVC template: 3G, PVC spec: 3G, PVC status 3G
2. User updates PVC spec: PVC template: 3G, PVC spec: 5G, PVC status: 3G
3. User updates PVC template before csi driver expand volume: PVC template: 4G, PVC spec: 5G, PVC status: 3G
4. The PVC expansion in step 2 won't be reflected: PVC template: 4G, PVC spec: 4G, PVC status: 3G

What do you think?

Author: I think this is the acceptable behavior. I see your link to pvc-autoresizer. For a controller to work with this KEP, it should keep trying to reconcile the PVC spec. So, it should update PVC spec again to 5G after step 4. And STS controller will not interference again because it only updates PVC if the `controller-revision-hash` label on the pod does not match.

For a human operator, he should monitor the PVC status to ensure his operation is successful anyway.

This is hard to avoid, I think. I would like to take advantage of KEP-1790 to help recover from expansion failure. So, I allow shrink the PVC spec (not tested yet, not sure how they work together).

Reviewer 6: Thank you for the explanation. I understood it, and I think it will work well now. When the alpha version is released, I will check to see if there are any cases I have overlooked.

     - Do not decreasing the storage size below its current status.
       Note that decrease the size in PVC spec can help recover from a failed expansion if 
       `RecoverVolumeExpansionFailure` feature gate is enabled.
   - `spec.volumeAttributesClassName` is patched to the template value.
   - `metadata.labels` and `metadata.annotations` are patched with server side apply.

2. If it is not possible to make the PVC [compatible](#what-pvc-is-compatible),
   do nothing. But when recreating a Pod and the corresponding PVC is deleting,
   wait for the deletion then create a new PVC together with the new Pod (already implemented).
<!--
Tested on Kubernetes v1.28, and I can see this event:
Warning  FailedCreate         3m58s (x7 over 3m58s)  statefulset-controller  create Pod test-rwop-0 in StatefulSet test-rwop failed error: pvc data-test-rwop-0 is being deleted
-->

> 3. Use either current or updated revision of the `volumeClaimTemplates` to create/update the PVC,

Reviewer: This description seems a bit chaotic, can you ensure that all the possible cases are properly described? Maybe a table will help to ensure that both InPlace and OnDelete is properly covered.

   just like Pod template.

> When to update PVCs:

Reviewer: Similar comment as the previous one. I'd expect PVC will be updated in most cases instantly, although that will depend on the `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` field value. Maybe a table expressing the statuses and actions could help with that.

1. before advancing `status.updatedReplicas` to the next replica,
  check that the PVCs of the next replica are 
   [compatible](#what-pvc-is-compatible) with the new `volumeClaimTemplates`.
   If not, and if we are not going to patch it automatically,
   wait for the user to delete/update the old PVC manually.

2. When doing rolling update, A replica is considered ready if the Pod is ready
   and all its volumes are not being updated in-place.
   Wait for a replica to be ready for at least `minReadySeconds` before proceeding to the next replica.

> 3. Whenever we check for Pod update, also check for PVCs update.

Reviewer: I'm not convinced that watching pod updates will be sufficient, and can guarantee you the complete information about PVC state, although I might be wrong. But I'd like to see explanation why relying only on pod updates is sufficient in that case.

   e.g.:
   - If `spec.updateStrategy.type` is `RollingUpdate`,
     update the PVCs in the order from the largest ordinal to the smallest.
   - If `spec.updateStrategy.type` is `OnDelete`,
     Only update the PVC when the Pod is deleted.
   
4. When patching the PVC, if we also re-create the Pod,
   update the PVC after old Pod deleted, together with creating new pod.
   Otherwise, if pod is not changed, update the PVC only.

> Failure cases: don't left too many PVCs being updated in-place. We expect to update the PVCs in order.

Reviewer: What about the case when the `.spec.podManagementPolicy` is `Parallel`, meaning we're not updating the pods in order?

Author: I think this is not relevant, since `podManagementPolicy` only controls scaling up or scaling down, not updating.
Do you mean `MaxUnavailableStatefulSet` feature-gate, which is still alpha since v1.24?

But in principle, if pods are updated in parallel, PVCs will also be updated in parallel.

> - If the PVC update fails, we should block the update process.

Reviewer: Which update? Can you be more specific, is it all of statefulset update or just pvc update?

Author: Should block the StatefulSet rollout process

  If the Pod is also deleted (by controller or manually), don't block the creation of new Pod.
  We should retry and report events for this.
  The events and status should look like those when the Pod creation fails.

- While waiting for the PVC to reach the compatible state,
  We should update status, just like what we do when waiting for Pod to be ready.
  We should block the update process if the PVC is never compatible.

- If the `volumeClaimTemplates` is updated again when the previous rollout is blocked,
  similar to [Pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/#forced-rollback),
  user may need to manually deal with the blocking PVCs (update or delete them).

### What PVC is compatible

A PVC is compatible with the template if:

> - All the immutable fields match exactly; and

Reviewer 3: (including storage class) matches (inferring from prior discussion that storage class changes will be left to the operator to manually manage)

- `metadata.labels` and `metadata.annotations` of PVC is a superset of the template; and
- `status.capacity.storage` of PVC is greater than or equal to
  the `spec.resources.requests.storage` of the template; and
- `status.currentVolumeAttributesClassName` of PVC is equal to
  the `spec.volumeAttributesClassName` of the template.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1: Batch Expand Volumes

We're running a CI/CD system and the end-to-end automation is desired.
To expand the volumes managed by a StatefulSet,
we can just use the same pipeline that we are already using to update the Pod.
All the test, review, approval, and rollback process can be reused.

> #### Story 2: Shinking the PV by Re-creating PVC

Reviewer: Shrinking was removed from the initial approach, iirc.

After running our app for a while, we optimize the data layout and reduce the required storage size.
Now we want to shrink the PVs to save cost.
We can not afford any downtime, so we don't want to delete and recreate the StatefulSet.
We also don't have the infrastructure to migrate between two StatefulSets.
Our app can automatically rebuild the data in the new storage from other replicas.
So we update the `volumeClaimTemplates` of the StatefulSet,
delete the PVC and Pod of one replica, let the controller re-create them,
then monitor the rebuild process.
Once the rebuild completes successfully, we proceed to the next replica.

#### Story 3: Asymmetric Replicas

> The storage requirement of different replicas are not identical,

Reviewer: I've wondered about the `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` usefulness, but this particular usecase nicely describes when using `OnDelete` value for that field will be useful. So you can ignore my previous question about it.

so we still want to update each PVC manually and separately.
Possibly we also update the `volumeClaimTemplates` for new replicas,
but we don't want the controller to interfere with the existing replicas.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

When designing the `InPlace` update strategy, we update the PVC like how we re-create the Pod.
i.e. we update the PVC whenever we would re-create the Pod;

> we wait for the PVC to be compatible whenever we would wait for the Pod to be available.

Reviewer: Not sure I understand, isn't InPlace meant to allow you to patch existing PVC, without the need to re-create the pod?

Author: Rephrased this, I actually want to reuse the infrastructures controlling Pod rollout. Not actually re-create the pod.

The StatefulSet controller should also keeps the current and updated revision of the `volumeClaimTemplates`,
so that a StatefulSet can still re-create Pods and PVCs that are yet-to-be-updated.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> TODO: Recover from failed in-place update (insufficient storage, etc.)

Reviewer: This section will need to cover all the possible edge cases, and failure scenarios, since I believe there will be a few. The tables I requested covering all the possible cases should help you identify those.

-->

We can use Server Side Apply to patch the PVCs,
so that we will not interfere with the user's manual changes,
e.g. to `metadata.labels` and `metadata.annotations`.

New invariants established about PVCs:
If the Pod has revision A label, all its PVCs are either not existing yet, or updated to revision A.

### Test Plan

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*
The goal is to ensure that we don't accept enhancements with inadequate testing.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations). Please adhere to the [Kubernetes testing guidelines][testing-guidelines]
when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

[ ] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

<!--
Based on reviewers feedback describe what additional tests need to be added prior
implementing this enhancement to ensure the enhancements have also solid foundations.
-->

> ##### Unit tests

Reviewer: This section is required before we accept this enhancement. A list of planned tests.

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>`

> ##### Integration tests

Reviewer: Same here.

<!--
Integration tests are contained in k8s.io/kubernetes/test/integration.
Integration tests allow control of the configuration parameters used to start the binaries under test.
This is different from e2e tests which do not allow configuration of parameters.
Doing this allows testing non-default options and multiple different and potentially conflicting command line options.
-->

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

- <test>: <link to test coverage>

> ##### e2e tests

Reviewer: And here.

Author: Added some plans. I will add more when I implement and test this.

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Reviewer: You'll want to describe how the upgrade and downgrade will work with skewed kube-apiserver and kube-controller manager.

are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->
Will add unit tests for the StatefulSet controller with and without the feature gate,
`volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` set to `InPlace` and `OnDelete` respectively.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

<!--
Try to be as paranoid as possible - e.g., what if some components will restart
mid-rollout?

Be sure to consider highly-available clusters, where, for example,
feature flags will be enabled on some API servers and not others during the
rollout. Similarly, consider large clusters and how enablement/disablement
will rollout across nodes.
-->

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> <!--

Author: I personally think events should be enough. It seems we currently don't have any metrics specific to statefulset controller? Anyway, I think we can leave this for beta.

  - StatefulSet controller (in KCM)
  - triggered by the StatefulSet spec update
- PATCH StatefulSet status
  - 1-2 per updated PVC in the StatefulSet (number of updated claim template * replica)
  - StatefulSet controller (in KCM)
  - triggered by the StatefulSet spec update and PVC status update

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type
  - Supported number of objects per cluster
  - Supported number of objects per namespace (for namespace-scoped objects)
-->
No

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - Which API(s):
  - Estimated increase:
-->
Not directly. The cloud provider may be called when the PVCs are updated.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

<!--
Describe them, providing:
  - API type(s):
  - Estimated increase in size: (e.g., new annotation of size 32B)
  - Estimated amount of new objects: (e.g., new Object X for every existing Pod)
-->
StatefulSet:

> - `spec`: 2 new enum fields, ~10B

Author: corrected. This is a left-over from old version.

For GA, this section is required: approvers should be able to confirm the
previous answers based on experience in the field.

The Troubleshooting section currently serves the `Playbook` role. We may consider
splitting it into a dedicated `Playbook` document (potentially with some monitoring
details). For now, we leave it here.
-->

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

###### What are other known failure modes?

<!--
For each of them, fill in the following information by copying the below template:
  - [Failure mode brief description]
    - Detection: How can it be detected via metrics? Stated another way:
      how can an operator troubleshoot without logging into a master or worker node?
    - Mitigations: What can be done to stop the bleeding, especially for already
      running user workloads?
    - Diagnostics: What are the useful log messages and their required logging
      levels that could help debug the issue?
      Not required until feature graduated to beta.
    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

> ## Implementation History

Author: Nothing have been merged. So I think no milestone reached now.

* `volumeClaimTemplates` is also used when creating new PVCs, so even if the existing PVCs cannot be updated,
  a user may still want to affect new PVCs.
* It violates the high-level design.
  The template describes a desired final state, rather than an immediate instruction.
  A lot of things can happen externally after we update the template.
  For example, I have an IaaS platform, which tries to kubectl apply one updated StatefulSet + one new StorageClass to the cluster to trigger the expansion of PVs.
  We don't want to reject it just because the StorageClass is applied after the StatefulSet.

### Support for updating arbitrary fields in `volumeClaimTemplates`

No technical limitations. Just that we want to be careful and keep the changes small, so that we can move faster.
This is just an extra validation in APIServer. We may remove it later if we find it is not needed.

### Patch PVC size regardless of the immutable fields

We propose to patch the PVC as a whole, so it can only succeed if the immutable fields matches.

If only expansion is supported, patching regardless of the immutable fields can be a logical choice.

> But this KEP also integrates with VAC. VAC is closely coupled with storage class.

Reviewer 3: Use full name of VAC first time the acronym is used - I had to infer what it was from the comments (https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-storage/3751-volume-attributes-class/README.md)

to ensure we have the correct version of PVC in cache when determining whether the PVC is ready.

### Kubernetes Controller Changes

Additionally watch for events from PVCs, in order to kickoff the update process when the PVC becomes ready.

If `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `OnClaimDelete`, nothing changes. This field acts like a per-StatefulSet feature-gate.
The changes described below applies only for `InPlace` policy.

Include `volumeClaimTemplates` in the `ControllerRevision`.

Since modifying `volumeClaimTemplates` will change the hash,
Add support for updating `controller-revision-hash` label of the Pod without deleting and recreating the Pod,
if the pod template is not changed.

Before creating a new Pod, or, if the Pod template is not changed, updating the label,
use server-side apply to update the PVCs used by the Pod.

The patch used in server-side apply is the volumeClaimTemplates in the StatefulSet, except:
* `spec.resources.requests.storage` is set to max(template `spec.resources.requests.storage`, PVC `status.capacity.storage`),
  so that we will not decrease the storage size below its current status.
  Note that we still may decrease the size in PVC spec,

>   which can help recover from a failed expansion if `RecoverVolumeExpansionFailure` feature gate is enabled.

Author: I'm going to drop the integration of `RecoverVolumeExpansionFailure`, given the [feedback](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/126530#discussion_r2114683326) we got. I added a section in Alternatives to explain this.

@gnuified what do you think as the author of that feature?

* `controller-revision-hash` label is added to the PVCs.

Naturally, most of the update control logics also apply to PVCs.
* Wait for PVCs to be ready for at least `minReadySeconds` before proceeding to the next replica.
* If `updateStrategy` is `RollingUpdate`, update the PVCs in the order from the largest ordinal to the smallest.
* If `updateStrategy` is `OnDelete`, only update the PVCs if the Pod is deleted manually.

When creating new PVCs, use the `volumeClaimTemplates` from the same revision that is used to create the Pod.

> ### User Stories (Optional)

Reviewer 7: I think it would be really nice to add a user story for recovering from a failed expansion.

I also think it would be great to include an explanation of the operational steps required to achieve them. 

For example, if I understand correctly, for **_story 1_** this is just a manipulation of the volume claim template on the STS. Whereas, story 2 is a manipulation of the underlying PVC is that right? Similarly, I would want to understand the proposed operational steps for recovering from a failed expansion.

If you don't want to include the operational steps in the user stories that's fine. Could be in a separate section or perhaps in a collapsible section inside the user stories.

Author: As requested by soltysh, we don't allow shrinking template size now. So we cannot roll back the StatefulSet. Instead, if the expansion fails, the user can:
* Change the StatefulSet volumeClaimUpdatePolicy back to OnClaimDeleted, effectively disabling this feature for the STS.
* Or update the PVC spec manually, if the RecoverVolumeExpansionFailure feature gate is enabled. However, this is a temp fix. When the STS is updated again, it will try to expand the PVC again.
* Migrate to a new STS and delete the problematic one.

-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

> Kubernetes does not support the modification of the `volumeClaimTemplates` of a StatefulSet currently.

Author: Yes, only StatefulSet. Other workloads don't have `volumeClaimTemplates` fields and does not interact with PVCs anyway.

## Motivation

<!--
This section is for explicitly listing the motivation, goals, and non-goals of
this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

Currently there are very few things that users can do to update the volumes of
their existing StatefulSet deployments.
They can only expand the volumes, or modify them with VolumeAttributesClass
by updating individual PersistentVolumeClaim objects as an ad-hoc operation.
When the StatefulSet scales up, the new PVC(s) will be created with the old
config and this again needs manual intervention.
This brings many headaches in a continuously evolving environment.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
* Allow users to update some fields of `volumeClaimTemplates` of a `StatefulSet`, specifically:
  * increasing the requested storage size (`spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.resources.requests.storage`)

>   * modifying Volume AttributesClass used by the claim( `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.volumeAttributesClassName`)

Author: While I think no changes require for quota support, quota is another reason for failed PVC update. Thanks for bringing this into attention. In the new revision, we will ensure the old pod is still running if quota is not enough (or any other reason that prevents PVC update).

* Add `.spec.volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` allowing users to decide how the volume claim will be updated: in-place or on PVC deletion.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->
* Support automatic re-creating of PersistentVolumeClaim. We will never delete a PVC automatically.
* Validate the updated `volumeClaimTemplates` as how PVC patch does.
* Update ephemeral volumes.
* Patch PVCs that are different from the template, e.g. StatefulSet adopts the pre-existing PVCs.
* Support for volumes that only support offline expansion.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### Kubernetes API Changes  

Change API server to allow specific updates to `volumeClaimTemplates` of a StatefulSet:

>    * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.resources.requests.storage` (increase only)

Reviewer 8: Because of historical reasons, not all PVCs can be expanded btw. The SC must have `allowVolumeExpansion` set to `true`. What happens if user increases size here but underlying SC doesn't allow it?

Currently this is explicitly blocked for PVC via admission. I am not recommending we do the same for Statefulsets, but we need a way out. We don't want statefulset controller to be stuck forever, retrying this operation.

Author: With current limitation, the way out is:
* Change the StatefulSet volumeClaimUpdatePolicy back to OnClaimDelete, effectively disabling this feature for the STS.
* Migrate to a new STS and delete the problematic one.

There is no technical reason preventing reducing storage size of template. Maybe we can discuss this with @soltysh again. If reducing the size is supported, we only need to undo the StatefulSet change.

Author: > what if user changes pod spec along with template size?

With the new revision, The old pod will still be running if SC doesn't allow expansion.

>    * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.volumeAttributesClassName`

Author: The proposal is using server-side apply for the whole PVC. So we do not need special case for each field, it naturally supports every mutable fields.

>    * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.volumeAttributesClassName`

Reviewer: This might be problematic, I was under the impression that the other feature (being beta) is on by default. That's my bad I haven't checked it. Now looking at https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3751 I don't see clear path for that functionality going forward, so I'd be inclined to hold on with this until we have a clear information why it's so.

   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.metadata.labels`
   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.metadata.annotations`

> Introduce a new field in StatefulSet `spec`: `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` to

Reviewer: Apologies for not catching this sooner, but upon reviewing the API types once again, I realized we already have `.spec.persistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy` which allows user to define what happens during PVC deletion and scaling. I believe we should re-use that field, and add `WhenUpdated` as a 3rd supported policy. 
So we'd have:
```golang
type StatefulSetPersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicy struct {
	// existing fields
	WhenDeleted PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType
	WhenScaled PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType

	// new field
	WhenUpdated PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType
}

type PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType string

const (
	// existing consts
	RetainPersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType = "Retain"
	DeletePersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType = "Delete"

	// new constant
	InPlacePersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType PersistentVolumeClaimRetentionPolicyType = "InPlace"
)
```

This approach would nicely allow users to request appropriate operations based on their demand. Even more, we'd expand our already available `Delete` policy with a new use-case.

Reviewer 8: I am afraid I agree with @huww98 , since original type had word - `Retention` in it, it is hard to reuse that for expansion purposes when former defines retention policy of pvc.

Author: > Compatibility with [that feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-apps/1847-autoremove-statefulset-pvcs).

I'm not sure I understand. That one is about delete PVCs, while this one is about update PVCs. How do they related?

> about adding the table listing all the possible combinations and how they will interact.

When we need such a table, we already making the API too complex. And IMO these two feature works orthogonal, they don't interact with each other.

> Simplicity of the API

I'm not sure. Both proposal add a new field. while my original proposal has only 2 possible value for the new field, your proposal has 3 (with 1 invalid). I'd say my proposal is actually simpler.

And how about my point above about reserve for future use?

specify how to coordinate the update of PVCs and Pods. Possible values are:

> - `OnClaimDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.

Author: No. `OnClaimDelete` means don't touch the existing PVCs. Only create new PVC with the new template, like `OnDelete` `spec.updateStrategy.type`. We will never delete PVC automatically.

> - `OnClaimDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.

Reviewer 8: So that means existing PVCs will simply be orphaned? i.e unused sitting around?

> - `OnClaimDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.

Author: No. We will reuse existing PVCs. The name of PVC does not contains random part, so we cannot create a new one without affecting the old one.

`OnClaimDelete` basically saids don't enable this feature for the StatefulSet. It is a per-StatefulSet feature gate.

To quote from the KEP:
> When `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `OnClaimDelete`, APIServer should accept the changes to `volumeClaimTemplates`, but StatefulSet controller should not touch the PVCs and preserve the current behaviour.

- `InPlace`: patch the PVC in-place if possible. Also includes the `OnClaimDelete` behavior.

Additionally collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.
Some fields in the `status` are updated to reflect the status of the PVCs:

> - claimsReadyReplicas: the number of replicas with all PersistentVolumeClaims ready to use.

Reviewer 4: This is a new field, right?

Reviewer: As mentioned in other comments, I'm against adding one more readyreplicas field which will be very confusing to users.

Author: I think we will need a field to expose the PVC readiness, for `kubectl rollout status` to wait for the last replica to be ready before returning. Any idea better than `claimsReadyReplicas`?

New Pod may still see old PVC configuration.
We already ensure that the PVC is updated before the new Pod is created.
However, the operation on PVCs can be asynchronous. And expansion may not finish without a running Pod.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

When `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `OnClaimDelete`, APIServer should accept the changes to `volumeClaimTemplates`,
but StatefulSet controller should not touch the PVCs and preserve the current behaviour.
Following describes the workflow when `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `InPlace`.

When updating volumeClaimTemplates along with pod template, we will go through the following steps:
1. Delete the old pod.
2. Apply the changes to the PVCs used by this replica.
3. Create the new pod with new `controller-revision-hash` label.
4. Wait for the new pod and PVCs to be ready.

> 5. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Reviewer: As explained elsewhere, we need to document that we'll just stop the rollout and document that case.

> 5. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Reviewer 8: So for drivers that support offline only expansion and if user makes both pod spec and volume claim template change, then they could have stateful rollout wedged. At minimum, we need to add appropriate event and error messages that can surfaced to the user.

I am not sure if the right decision is to leave it at that or we should try and improve things. I was discussing few ideas with @jsafrane and came up with some solutions:

```
- when starting a pod, let kubelet wait until controller expansion completes (if it can detect so and not break anything)
- add a field to CSIDriver, so stateful set controller knows what kind of expansion it is dealing with and support both
-  add enum to StatefulSet what kind of expansion to do
  * helm chart authors can use safe (= offline) expansion
  * people with local storage knowledge can use online
```

> 5. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Author: > when starting a pod, let kubelet wait until controller expansion completes (if it can detect so and not break anything)

@gnufied I think this is not enough. According to [CSI spec](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blob/master/spec.md#getplugincapabilities), offline resize requires the volume not to be controller-published. This means we need to:
* introduce a new mechanism to communicate volume resize capability (ideally at volume level, new volumes may supports online expansion, while old volumes may not for historical reason).
* change kubelet to wait for expansion before updating Node.status.volumesInUse
* change KCM to wait for node.volumesInUse before creating VolumeAttachment

And since we cannot fully cancel an expansion, if the expansion failed, we are blocking the pod from starting until user delete and recreate all the Pod/PVC/PV, which may not be a good user experience.

So I think this is too complex to fit into this KEP.

> helm chart authors can use safe (= offline) expansion

Why offline expansion is safer?

> 5. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Reviewer 8: >Why offline expansion is safer?

I meant offline is safer because it will work for all storage providers.

> 5. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Author: @gnufied By offline expansion, we means the following steps are necessary for the expansion:
1. delete the old Pod
2. CSI NodeUnpublishVolume/NodeUnstageVolume
3. CSI ControllerUnpublishVolume
4. CSI ControllerExpandVolume
5. start the new Pod
6. CSI ControllerPulishVolume
7. CSI NodeStageVolume/NodePublishVolume/NodeExpandVolume

Is that correct? How can we sequence ControllerExpandVolume after ControllerUnpublishVolume? If the old and new Pods are on the same node, There may be even no ControllerUnpublishVolume. Maybe we can delay the creation of new Pod to achieve this. But that still requires adding some new fields to Kubernetes API, and should belongs to a future KEP.

> Users who use offline volumes will be wedged right now anyways, even in successful case. Even for online expansion if user updates pod spec and volumeClaimTemplate and expansion fails, then rollout will be wedged.

But that is all at StatefulSet level. The Pod will always work. If we involve kubelet to wait for something, pod will not come up when that goes wrong, which is much worse.

Do you have an example of SP that only support offline expansion? So that we can check what operations are really required.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### Kubernetes API Changes  

Change API server to allow specific updates to `volumeClaimTemplates` of a StatefulSet:
   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.resources.requests.storage` (increase only)
   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.spec.volumeAttributesClassName`
   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.metadata.labels`
   * `spec.volumeClaimTemplates.metadata.annotations`

Introduce a new field in StatefulSet `spec`: `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` to
specify how to coordinate the update of PVCs and Pods. Possible values are:
- `OnClaimDelete`: the default value, only update the PVC when the the old PVC is deleted.
- `InPlace`: patch the PVC in-place if possible. Also includes the `OnClaimDelete` behavior.

Additionally collect the status of managed PVCs, and show them in the StatefulSet status.

> Some fields in the `status` are updated to reflect the status of the PVCs:

Author: The only planed change is already listed below:
> - currentRevision, updateRevision, currentReplicas, updatedReplicas are updated to reflect the status of PVCs.

No new fields in status are planed.

> Some fields in the `status` are updated to reflect the status of the PVCs:

Reviewer 5: Even if the fields stay the same, their meaning will change. The meaning is also part of the API. Nevertheless, API review part will be easier if you include the API docs in the KEP.

> Some fields in the `status` are updated to reflect the status of the PVCs:

Author: Added

- currentRevision, updateRevision, currentReplicas, updatedReplicas
  are updated to reflect the status of PVCs.

> With these changes, user can still use `kubectl rollout status` to monitor the update process,

Author: I was planed to add a new field `status.claimReadyReplicas` and use that in `kubectl rollout status`. But that is [rejected](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4651#discussion_r2150084005) by @soltysh. The current plan is waiting for PVC ready before updating Pod. So pod ready will imply PVC ready, and no changes are required in kubectl. Please see `Alternatives > Order of Pod / PVC updates` in the KEP doc for more.

both for automated patching and for the PVCs that need manual intervention.

A PVC is considered ready if:
* PVC's `status.capacity.storage` is greater than or equal to min(template spec, PVC spec).
  If the template is 10Gi, PVC is 10Gi and is expanding to 100Gi but failed, we still consider it ready.
* PVC's `status.currentVolumeAttributesClassName` equals to `spec.volumeAttributesClassName`.

A new label `controller-revision-hash` is added to the PVCs,
to ensure we have the correct version of PVC in cache when determining whether the PVC is ready.

### Kubernetes Controller Changes

Additionally watch for events from PVCs, in order to kickoff the update process when the PVC becomes ready.

If `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `OnClaimDelete`, nothing changes. This field acts like a per-StatefulSet feature-gate.
The changes described below applies only for `InPlace` policy.

Include `volumeClaimTemplates` in the `ControllerRevision`.

Since modifying `volumeClaimTemplates` will change the hash,

> Add support for updating `controller-revision-hash` label of the Pod without deleting and recreating the Pod,

Reviewer 5: > Yes. I expect user to change to OnClaimDelete to escape from any PVC update failure

Reverting to OnClaimDelete will not help. Updating or reverting the claim templates will.

> And users always change their mind, OnClaimDelete has its own use case where user really want each of the PVCs looks different.

Yes this is useful, but we will have to figure out how to support that.

> We require user to initiate another rollout to update the PVCs, to avoid any surprise.

I am not sure here, I think the bigger surprise would be if we do not update the PVC when `InPlace` is used.

> What is rolled back? Behavior when change between InPlace and OnClaimDelete is already described in the doc. volumeClaimTemplate rollback works just like a normal update.

The StatefulSet to an older revision. I think it would be good to go over some of these scenarios as they might be surprising and not just a simple update.

> I'd like to enable existing StatefulSet to taking advantage of the new feature. And what is the headaches? I'd expect the current plan will handle everything smoothly.

Rev 1: 
StatefulSet with OnClaimDelete on node A (tracked)
PVC on Node A (untracked)

Rev 2:
Statefulset with InPlace on node A (tracked)
PVC on Node A (tracked)

Rev3:
Statefulset with InPlace on node B (tracked)
PVC on Node B (tracked)

Reverting to Rev1 will make the pod unschedulable.

if the pod template is not changed.

Before creating a new Pod, or, if the Pod template is not changed, updating the label,
use server-side apply to update the PVCs used by the Pod.

The patch used in server-side apply is the volumeClaimTemplates in the StatefulSet, except:
* `spec.resources.requests.storage` is set to max(template `spec.resources.requests.storage`, PVC `spec.resources.requests.storage`),
  so that we will never decrease the storage size.
* `controller-revision-hash` label is added to the PVCs.

Naturally, most of the update control logic also applies to PVCs.
* If `updateStrategy` is `RollingUpdate`, update the PVCs in the order from the largest ordinal to the smallest.

> * If `updateStrategy` is `OnDelete`, only update the PVCs if the Pod is deleted manually.

Author: Updated the KEP, we will not update the PVCs when OnDelete is used.

So we will not interfere with them as long as the `controller-revision-hash` label is preserved by them.

New Pod may still see old PVC configuration.
We already ensure that the PVC is updated before the new Pod is created.
However, the operation on PVCs can be asynchronous. And expansion may not finish without a running Pod.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

When `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `OnClaimDelete`, APIServer should accept the changes to `volumeClaimTemplates`,
but StatefulSet controller should not touch the PVCs and preserve the current behaviour.
Following describes the workflow when `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is `InPlace`.

When updating volumeClaimTemplates along with pod template, we will go through the following steps:
1. Apply the changes to the PVCs used by this replica.
2. Wait for the PVCs to be ready.

> 3. Delete the old pod.

Reviewer 5: Ok makes sense. Anyway, `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` should be a struct to support customizations of the update process in the future.

> 3. Delete the old pod.

Author: Will make the change

1. Apply the changes to the PVCs used by this replica.
2. Wait for the PVCs to be ready.
3. Update the pod with new `controller-revision-hash` label.
4. Advance to the next replica and repeat from step 1.

Assuming we are updating a replica from revision A to revision B:

| Pod | PVC | Action |
| --- | --- | --- |
| not existing | not existing | create PVC at revision B |
| not existing | at revision A | update PVC to revision B |
| not existing | at revision B | create Pod at revision B |
| at revision A | not existing | create PVC at revision B |
| at revision A | at revision A | update PVC to revision B |
| at revision A | at revision B | wait for PVC to be ready, then delete Pod or update Pod label |
| at revision B | not existing | create PVC at revision B |
| at revision B | existing | wait for Pod to be ready |

Note that when Pod is at revision B but PVC is at revision A, we will not update PVC.
Such state can only happen when user set `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` to `InPlace` when the feature-gate of KCM is disabled,
or disable the previously enabled feature-gate.
We require user to initiate another rollout to update the PVCs, to avoid any surprise.

> When `volumeClaimUpdatePolicy` is updated from `OnClaimDelete` to `InPlace`,

Reviewer 5: I still think it deserves a discussion: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4651#discussion_r2157433788
